CHAP. XIX. That the favoured of Princes ought not to be dishonest of their tongues, nor envious of their words.
ANaxagoras the Philosopher disputing one day of the cause why Nature had placed the members of mans body in such order as they are, and of the property and complexion of everyone of them, and to what end they had been so orderly placed by Nature, each member in his place, falling in the end to treat of the  tongue, said  thus of it: You must understand  my good Disciples, that not without art and great mystery, Nature gave us two feet, two hands, two ears, and two eyes, and yet for all this but one tongue, whereby she showed us, that in 
   
our going, feeling, smelling, hearing, and seeing: we may be as long as we will: but in speaking we should be as sparing and scant, as could be: Alleging further, That Nature suffered us to go open, and bare faced: the Eyes, the ears, the hands, the feet, and other parts of the body bare also, excepting the Tongue, which she hath environed with jaws, and empaled with Teeth, and also shut up with lips: which she did to give us to understand, that there is nothing in this present life that hath more need of Guard and defence, then hath this our unbridled Tongue. 
And therefore said  Pythachus the philosopher, that a mans Tongue is made like the iron point of a Lance, but yet that it was more dangerous then that: For the point of the lance can but hurt the flesh, but the Tongue pierceth the heart.
And surely it was a true saying of this philosopher. For I know not that man how virtuous or patient so ever he be, but thinks it less hurt, the bloody sword should pierce his flesh, then that he should be touched in honour, with the venomous point of the Serpentine Tongue. For, how cruel soever the wound be, Time doth heal it, and makes it well again: but defame or infamy, neither late nor never can be amended.
We see men refuse to go by water for fear of drowning: not to come too near the fire for fear of burning, nor to go to the wars, for fear of killing: to eat no ill meats, for being sick: to climb up on high, for fear of falling: to go in the dark, for fear of stumbling: to avoid the ill air and rain, for fear of rheums: AND yet I see very few or none, that can beware of detractors and ill tongues. And that this is true I tell you, I do not think that in anything a man is in such peril and danger, as when he lives accompanied with men dishonest in their doings, and vile, and naught in their tongues.
I have also read touching this matter, that Aformius the philosopher being asked what he meant to spend the most part of his time amongst the desert mountains, and in hazard, every hour to be devoured of wild beasts? Answered thus. Wild beasts have no other weapons to hurt me, but their horns and nails, and their Teeth to devour me, but men never cease to hurt and offend me, with all their whole members.
And that this is true, behold I pray you, how they look at me with their Eyes, spurn me with their feet, torment me with their hands, hate me with their hearts, and defame me with their tongues. So that we have great reason to say: That a man lives with more security amongst wild beasts, then amongst malignant and envious people.
Plutarch in his book De exilio says That the Lidians had a Law, that as they sent the condemned murderers to row in the Galleys, so they confined those that were Detractors, and evil tongued men into a secret place, (far off from all company) the space  of half a year. In so much that many times these lewd mates chose rather to row in the Galley three years then to be exempt from company, and speaking with any but six months. 
Much like unto this Law did Tiberius the Emperor make another, and condemned a great talker and railer of his tongue, and commanded straightly that he should never speak word the space of a whole year. And as the historic says, he remained dumb, and never spake during the whole term, but yet that he did (with his dumbness) more hurt with nods and signs with his fingers, then many other would have done with 
   
their ill tongues. 
By these two examples we may see, that sith these naughty tongues are not to be repressed by silence, in secret, nor to entreat them as friends nor by doing them good, nor by sending them to Galleyes: nor to make them hold their peace, and to be as dumb men: By mine advise I would have them banished (by general counsel) out of all Colleges counsels, chapters, towns and Commonwealths: For we see daily by experience, that let an apple have never so little a bruise, that bruise is enough to rot him quickly, if he be not eaten in time.
Demosthenes the Philosopher was of great authority for his person, grave in manners, and condition, and very sententious, AND profound in his words: but with these he was so obstinate, AND willful, and such a talker in all his matters, that all Greece quaked for fear of him.
Whereupon all the Athenians one day assembled in their hall, or common house, and there they appointed him a great stipend of the goods of the Commonwealth, telling him that they gave him this, not that he should read, but because he should hold his peace. Also this great and renowned Cicero that was so valiant and politick in martial affairs, so great a friend to the Commonweal of Rome and moreover a Prince of Eloquence, for the Latin tongue, though he was cruelly put to death by Mark Antony, it was not for any fact committed against him, neither for any wrong or injury he had done him, save only for that he envied against him, and spake evil of him.
Also the Noble and famous Poet Salust, and famous Orator of Rome, was not hated of strangers, and not beloved of his own neighbours, for no other cause, but for that he never took pen in hand to write, but he ever wrote against the one, and never opened his mouth to speak, but he always spake evil of the other.
Plutarch touching this matter recites in his books De Republica, that amongst them of, in their public weal, it was holden an inviolable  Law, that they should not put a murderer to death for killing of any, but that they should only execute, and put him to torture, that would defame his neighbour, or in any one Word seem to touch him in honour and estimation. 
So that those barbarous Nations thought it more execrable to defame a man, then to kill and murder him: And therefore I say, he that burns my house, beats my person, and robs me of my goods, must needs do me great damage: but he that takes upon him to touch my honour and reputation with infamy, I will say, he offends me much, and that so greatly, as he may well stand in fear of his life: For there is not so little an offence done to a man of stout courage, but he carries it ever after imprinted in his heart, till he have revenged the villainy done him: even so in Princes Courts, there rise more quarrels, and debates through evil tongues and dishonest reports, then there doth for any play or shrewd turns that are done.
I know not what reason they have to strike off his hand that first draws sword, and favourth and leaves him unpunished, that draws blood with his il tongue.
O what a happy good turn were it for the Commonweal, if (as they have in all Towns and well governed policies, penal laws, prohibiting for to wear or carry weapon) they had like laws also to punish detractive, and wicked tongues: Surely, there cannot be so great a blot or vice in a 
   
Noble man, Knight or Gentleman of honest behaviour and countenance, as to be counted and reputed a tattler of his tongue, and therewithal a detractor of others. But let not such deceive themselves, thinking that for their countenance or estates sake they be privileged above others, at their wills and pleasure to enlarge their tongues on whom they list in such manner, but that their inferiors far, will as liberally speak of them, yea, AND as much to their reproach, as they before had done of them: repenting as much of their honesty and credit for their calling (being in equivalent in estate or degree to them) as they do of their dignity and reputation. 
At that time when I was a Courtier, and lived in Princes Court, there died out of the Court a worthy knight, who at his noble funerals was commended of us all, to be a good and devout Christian, and chiefly above all his noble and heroical virtues, he was only lauded and renowned, for that they never heard him speak ill of any man.
So one of the company that was present, hearing this great praise of him, took upon him to say this of him: If he never spake ill of any, then did he never know what pleasure those have that speak ill of their enemies. Which words when we heard though we passed them over  with silence, yet was there none but was greatly offended at them, and good cause why: For to say truly, the first degree of malignity is, for a man to take a felicity in speaking ill of his neighbour.
King Darius being at dinner one day, there were put forth of the Weighters and Standers by, certain Arguments of the Acts and doings of Alexander the Great: in which lispute, one Mignus a Captain of the King, and greatly in favour with him, was very earnest against Alexander, and went too far in speech of him. But Darius perceiving him thus passioned, said  to him: O Mignus,  hold thy tongue, for I do not bring thee into the wars with me, that thou shouldst infame Alexander (and touch his honour with thy tongue, but that thou shouldst with thy sword over come him. 
By these examples we may gather, how much we ought to hate detraction and ill speaking, since we see that the very enemies themselves cannot abide to hear their enemies evil spoken off in their presence: and this is always observed of the honourable, grave, and wise men that are of noble minds: For sure each noble heart disdains to be revenged of his enemy with his tongue, for his injuries done him: if he cannot be revenged on him with his sword.
It is fitting for all in general to be modest and honest in their speech, but much more it is due for him that embraces the favour and credit of his Prince: For it is his profession to do good, to help every man, and to speak ill of no man.
They have such Sentinels of spies upon them continually (which are officers in Court and about the Prince) to mark what they speak and do, that treading once awry (how little soever it be) it is straight blown into the Princes ears, and they perhaps accused of that which they never thought delighting, and taking great pleasure to tell openly what they heard them say.
Such therefore as are daily Courtiers, attending upon the  Prince, and in favour with him, must (if they mean to continue that favour and credit) be gentle, and courteous in their Words, and bountiful to those that stand in need of them. 
   
Also the esteemed Courtier must beware he do not speak ill of no man, but also that he be not too great a talker. For commonly these great talkers besides that they are not esteemed, be also reputed of small judgment and of simple counsel. 
Pythyas', that was the great Governor, and Duke of the Athenian nation, was a Noble prince, beloved and feared, hardy, and valiant, and yet in the end as says Plutarch, the abundance of words, obscured the glory of his heroical deeds.
Although oft times these great talkers, and men too full of words be of Noble birth' or worship, wealthy in possessions, and otherwise of authority and estimation: yet nevertheless, all that time they spend in speaking too much, others that hear them, occupy the same in deriding and scorning of them.
I beseech you consider, what greater reproach could a Courtier have, then to be counted a babbler, a prater of his tongue, and a liar? For when he thinks every man is attentive, and listening to him, it is quite contrary: for even at that instant do they laugh him to scorn: and yet this is nothing to the shame they do unto him afterwards.
For those that talk to him, whilst he is thus babbling, pots at him with their mouths, behind his back, nods with their heads, holds down their Eyes, and soothes him in all that he says, and all this not to praise or commend him, but to be merry afterwards at the matter, when they are together. And it is a sport to note, and hear of one of these great Talkers, if any man talk of war, of the liberal sciences, of hunting, or of husbandry, he will straight leap into the matter although he be utterly ignorant in the thing proponed, taking upon him to reason of the matter, as if he were very skillful, or master of that faculty. And to make the hearers believe, that that is true he says, he brings in an example: saying that he hath seen it, read it, or heard it, and all perhaps a stark Lie, that he neither saw it, read it, nor heard it of any: but only devised of his own head, on a sudden, under the colour of Truth, to forge and make a false Lie.
Acaticus the Philosopher, being one day at a Feast, where he neither spake nor offered once to speak: being asked after Dinner, what was the occasion of his silence, answered them thus: It is better for a man to know his  time to speak, then it is to know to speak. For to speak well, is given us by Nature: but to choose fit time to speak, proceeds of wisdom. 
Epimenides the painter, after he had dwelt long time in Asia, returned to Rhodes, from whence he first departed, and because none of the Rhodians ever heard him speak anything, either of that he had seen, or done in Asia, they marvelled very much, and earnestly prayed him to discourse unto them some part of that he had seen, and suffered in Asia. To whom he made this answer.
Two years I sulked the Seas, abiding the perils of the water, and ten other years I was resident in Asia, to learn the perfection of a painters art: six other years I studied in Greece, to accustom myself to be silent, and now you would I should feed you, with tales and news.
O Rhodians, come to me no more with any such motion: for you should come to my house to buy pictures, and not to hear news. Albeit in so many years, and in such far and strange Countries it could not be but Epimenides had seen many things worthy to be recounted, and also very pleasant for to hear: yet he would never tell them, nor show then: 
   
and sure herein he did like a good philosopher, and answered like a wise AND grave person: For in telling of strange things, and of diverse countries, there are few that will believe them, and many that will stand in doubt whether they be true or not. 
And therefore touching this matter also, Pythagoras the Philosopher was one day asked upon what occasion he made his Scholars use so great silence in his College, that in two years after they were entered, they might not speak. He answered thus: In other Philosophers Schools they teach their Disciples to speak, but in mine there is taught nothing but to hold their peace. For in the whole World there is no better nor higher  philosophy then to know to bridle the tongue. 
It is a marvellous thing to see a man that with time his beard and hairs of his head become all white, his face withered, his ears deaf, his legs swollen his breath stink, his spleen stopped, and his body faint and feeble with age, and all the parts thereof consumed save only the heart and tongue, which we never see wax old in manner, how aged or impotent soever he be, but rather daily become green: and that is worst of all is, that what evil the wretched heart thinks in that crooked and miserable age, that doth that accursed tongue with all celerity utter.
There is a Company of Courtiers in the Court that presume to be eloquent, and well spoken, and of Courtly entertainment, which when they will talk of some pleasant matter, they must first tell you a lie, and surely these kind of Courtiers we may better call them detractors of others, then civil entertainers.
Accursed be he that to the prejudice of his neighbour makes profession to be a Courtly entertainer, and you shall hardly see none of these recited Courtiers jest of any but they have in secret Spun the thread to weave a great cloth of malice. And yet we do these men great honour and reverence, not for any good will we bear them, but for that we are afraid  of their ill tongues, and although to dissemble other while, it is a grave and wise mans part, yet for all that we may not judge ill of them, since we see the best mans honour and credit commonly to be no greater nor less: then a malignant person shall seem to use his tongue to speak of him. I remember there was in the Court in my time a noble man, noble of birth and person both, whom I reproved diverse times (as his familiar friend) of his prodigal living and ill speaking: And he made me this answer.
Truly sir, those that report that I speak ill of them, it is themselves that do it of me: and if I follow them therein, it is for nothing else, but to be a witness for them, if any seek to impugn their saying: but sure of myself I never uttered or devised word that might be to the prejudice of any. O what evil causes he, that speaks ill of another, he only offends not that begins, but he that assists him, and much more he that hears him, and after publishes it but above all, he that tells it abroad, and adds more then he heard.
The Favoured of Princes must also think, that though they are prohibited to speak much, yet it is most  fit and decent for them to be true and faithful Secretaries: For there is no thing that the Prince prizeth more, then the secret breast of his favoured Courtier. And therefore I say not without cause that they ought to be secret, but most secret: For the esteemed Courtier must have a better consideration of his princes secrets 
   
committed unto him, then of the benefits received of him. 
Sure it is no small, but a great and most necessary virtue in a man to be close and of few words, and so secret indeed, that he make no more countenance of that was told him privily, then if he had never heard it spoken of.
I know another kind of people so profane to speak ill, that they cannot keep secret their own faults, much less others faults, publishing them in every corner.
Cecilius Metellus being asked one day of a Centurion, what he meant to do the next day following? answered thus.
Think not Centurion that those things I am determined to do, my hands shall so lightly discover: for I am of this mind, if I knew that my shirt had any knowledge of that I will do tomorrow, I would put it off, and throw it straight into the fire, AND see it burned before my face.
It is not alike trust, to put money into one mans hands of trust, and to commit secrets to the breast of another: and this to be true we see it plainly, that the prince delivers his goods and treasure to the custody of many, but his secrets he commits only to one.
The favoured of Princes ought to be so secret, that whatsoever they see the Prince do or say (be it in the presence of diverse, and that they are told of it by many:) Yet they ought not to be acknown of it. For, indeed the Prince speaks many things commonly for his pleasure, which being reported again of the Favoured Courtier, will be thought true, and most certain.
Therefore speaking generally of this matter, I say, that surely Friends are greatly bound to keep the secrets of their friends: For that day I discover my intent to any, the self same I make him lord of my liberty. Therefore let that man think he hath won a marvellous treasure, that hath a secret friend. For without doubt it is no such matter of importance, to keep treasure safely locked up in a chest, as it is to commit and trust secrets unto the heart of another.
Plutarch writes that the Athenians having wars with King Philip of Macedony, because there came certain letters of K: Philips to their hands (intercepted by their scouts) directed and sent unto his wife Olympia: which they no sooner understood, but they presently returned again safely sealed, and untouched of them, as they came first unto them, saying: That sith by their law they were bound to be secret, they would not reveal the secrets of others, notwithstanding they were their mortal enemies, as K: Philip was to them: and therefore they would neither see them, nor read them openly.
Diodorus Siculus says also, that among the Egyptians it was a criminal act for any man to bewray the secrets of another: which was proved true by the example of a Priest, that in the Temple of the Goddess Isis had de flowered a virgin, and they both trusting to the fidelity of another Priest, making their love known unto him: even as they were in Venus sweet delights, he not regarding any longer their secrets, in ipso facto exclaimed and cried out, and thereupon convict and apprehended by the Justice, these poor Lovers were miserably executed, and this spiteful and unfortunate Priest condignly banished.
And this banished Priest complaining of the unjust sentence, saying, that which he revealed was in favour of the Religion, and for the behoof of the Commonwealth: the Judge answered him thus: If thou hadst known their offence of thyself, without their notice given thee, thou hadst had reason to have complained of our sentence, 
   
but since they trusted thee with their doings, and thou gavest them thy word and promise to be secret, if thou hadst called to mind the bond thou wert bound to them in, and that thyself did freely without their compulsion submit thyself unto, thou wouldst not once dared to have published the fact as thou hast done. 
Plutarch in his book de exilio says, that a man of Athens once demanded an Egyptian (Disciple of a Philosopher) what he had under his cloak, answered him thus: Truly thou hast studied little, and born away less, although thou art an Athenian born, sith thou seest that I carry secretly that thou demandst, because thou nor none other should know it, and yet thou askest it of myself, what it is that I carry.
Anasillus that was a Captain of the Athenians, was taken of the Lacedemonians, and put to the torture, because he should tell that he knew: and what the King Agesilaus his Lord and Master did, to whom he gave this answer. You Lacedemonians have liberty to dismember me, and to hew me in pieces: but so have not I to reveal my Lord and Masters secrets:  For in Athens we use rather to die, then to bewray the secrets of our friend. 
King Lisimachus entreated the Philosopher Philipides very earnestly, that he would come and dwell with him: but he made them this answer: I would be very glad to be in your company, knowing you to be a favourer of Philosophy: and if you will go to the wars, I will follow you: and if you trust me with your goods, I will keep them carefully and faithfully, if you have children, I will teach them with all my heart: if you will use my counsel in your affairs, I will give you the best I can: And if you will also give me the charge of your commonwealth, I will govern it with my best discretion.
Only one thing I will request you that you will never command me: that is, not to make me partaker of your secrets. For it might happen that what you had told me in secret, yourself unawares at a time might tell it openly, and yet not think of it: and being afterwards told you by some other, you would presently enter into suspect that it came to knowledge by me. This Philosopher would first indent with the Prince (before he would come to his service) that he should never hear any of these things the knowledge whereof brings many a man to their end, or at the least to some great mischief: only to show us the eminent peril and danger the Secretary of a prince stands in. For our heart is such a friend of news, that every hour it feels a thousand temptations to utter that to others, that was delivered to us of secret.
In this our age we do not use for to keep secrets, so well as in old time the Grecians were wont, sith we see by experience, that if one friend have to day told his friend a thing in secret, tomorrow, yea perhaps the self same night before, it was told among the neighbours.
There are also some kind of men so desirous to hear news, that for to know it, they will swear a thousand othes never to reveal it again to any. But so soon as they know it, they are like unto the blood hounds that follow the Dear, now here, now there smelling with their noses, till they have found the hurt Dear, then they open and bay for their Master.
Therefore I counsel and exhort all wise and discreet men, that they do not accompany with those whom they know are not secret: for the hurt that 
   
comes by them, consists not only to tell that they know, see, and hear: but with this they tell that they have imagined of their own wicked, and malicious heads. It cannot be otherwise, but being men, we are also subject to the frailty of a man: As for example; 
To fall into the sin of the Flesh, and in that to forget the sin of gluttony, and to have small consideration of that of sloth, to be assured of that of Avarice, or with that to be over come with passion and rage, or to be puffed up in the sin of Pride. And if perhaps by misfortune, any one chance into such mens company, that hath but part, or all these conditions, and such one as do discover and disclose both his own  secrets and others too, what other can there be hoped of, then a fire enflamed in his good fame and reputation, and a contagious plague and pestilence in his house?
For that that I have heard, seen, and read, yea and also proved: I say and affirm, that there is no bread so ill spent, as that that is given to the Servants which open and reveal their Masters secrets.
And sure it may be said , that such are not Servants that serve them, but Traitors that betray them, and fell their Masters liberty. And it is of such importance, for the Favoured of Princes, to keep secret, and not to reveal any part of the Princes secrets, that every man must think, that when the Prince tells them anything in secret, he tells it not alone to them, but rather he confesses it unto them.
Princes being men (as indeed they are) and much busied, with the cares of the Commonwealth, it cannot be, but when they are withdrawn a part into their privy chamber, they will both play, talk, sleight, sigh, laugh, be angry, threaten, and make much again of some before others.
All which things though they do before their servants in secret, it is not their pleasure, neither will they like it should be told abroad amongst their Subjects.
And sure they have great reason: for men of gravity and authority, do not lose their reputation for doing of  things grave, and of good example: but they are justly noted, when publicly they will show any lightness or folly, how lightly soever it be. Not only those that be in authority and favour about the Prince, but such other officers of the Court and Servants of houshold of the prince also, ought not to tell or reveal anything they see their Prince do: For they may be well assured, that the prince will be more offended and displeased to have that he doth in his privy Chamber told abroad by those of the privy Chamber, or other whom it pleases him to make familiar with him, then he would be, if his treasures and receivers should rob him of his treasure. It was told to Denys the Syracusan on a time that Plato the Philosopher was at the chamber door to speak with him, and he presently sent Bias of his privy Chamber (that he loved well) to him to know what he would with the King:  and Plato a ked Bias what Denys did: and he answered that he lay stark naked upon a Table, which when Denys understood, he was so offended with Bias, that he commanded forthwith he should be beheaded, saying first these words unto him. I will that like a traitor thou be beheaded, sithence thou hast traitorously betrayed me, presuming to disclose the secrets of my Chamber. For I sent thee not to Plato to tell him what I did, but for to know what he would of me. Now Princes familiars and Beloved of them, as they must be very circumspect and heedful that they tell no man the 
   
Princes secrets: so they must be much careful that they tell it not chiefly to women, yea though they were their own wives: For as women are very good and profitable, to look to  things of household, and safely for to lock up their husbands goods: So are they on the other side very dangerous for man to commit any secrets to them: For notwithstanding a woman know, that in reveling the secrets of her husband, she puts her life in peril, the honour of her husband, the loss of her children, the reputation of her house and kindred, and peradventure the peace and tranquility of the Commonweal: yet had she rather die, then she should not utter that she knows. 
And many times for no other respect, but to make these women believe that hearth her, that she only commands her husband, and all besides in her house. Well, I will enlarge myself no further of this matter, for if I would but give my pen leave to write that I know, I should find lime and sand enough to build a Tower as high as Babylon.
But to end my purpose, I will speak this one word, and that is, That I counsel and exhort, and with all my heart request Princes Familiars or Servants, that they commit not their Princes secrets to any, how great a friend, or near kinsman soever he be to them: For they may be assured, that since they refuse to keep secret that the Prince commands them, that much less their friend will keep it secret for any request they make to him. If thou cannot keep the secret, that to open it, imports the loss of thy favour AND credit, and happily thy life also: how canst thou think another will do it, that in telling it, wins both honour and credit.



CHAP. XX. A commendation of Truth, which professed Courtiers ought to embrace, and in no respect to be found defective in the contrary, telling one thing for another.
EPimenides the Philosopher being requested of the Rhodians to tell them, what the virtue was they called verity, he answered them thus: Verity my friends, is a thing which the Gods above all other profess, and her virtue is such, that it warms the heavens, lights the earth, maintains justice, and governs the Commonwealth, and suffers no evil thing in her, making plain and clear all doubtful and hidden things.
The Corinthians asked the like question also of Chilo the Philosopher what verity was; who answered, that it was a perdurable pillar, never diminishing, nor decreasing: a buckler or shield impassable, a fair time that is never troubled, an army that never perishes, a flower that never withers, a Sea that never fears fortune and a sure haven where never was ship wrack.
Anaxarchus the Philosopher, was also demanded of the Lacedemonians what verity was, who answered that it was a health without sickness, a life without end, a julep and syrup that heals all, a Sun that never darkeneth, a Moon without Eclipse, an herb that never dryeth, a gate that is never shut, and a way that never wearies man.
   
The like was asked of Eschines the philosopher touching verity, by the Rhodians: And he said , that it was a virtue, without which all force was weakened, Justice corrupted, humility fained and dissembled, patience insupportable, chastity vain, liberty lost, and pity superflous. 
The like was demanded of Pharmacus the philosopher by the Romans. And his answer was, that verity was a true Center, wherein all things reposed, a card to sail by, to direct the pilot and mariners, a wisdom to heal and recure every man, and a present remedy for all evils: a height, in the top whereof every man resteth, and a bright light, to enlighten the whole world. And surely this makes me think that these Philosopehrs were great Friends and Lovers of verity, since that they did so much enrich and sublime the same, with so many rare and excellent titles.
But now omitting these Philosophers, who have truly spoken that they knew: let us come speak of him that above all the World hath exalted verity: which was the divine WORD: and that was JESUS CHRIST, the only begotten Son of GOD: and true glass of Eternity: who being asked the self same thing of Pilate, said  not to him, I am wisdom, neither justice, nor chastity, nor patience, humanity, not charity: But only said  unto him, I am verity. To let us understand, that every creature might be partaker of that verity. But our Lord Jesus Christ was not partaker of that verity, but the sole and only possessor of the same, he being the very Trues it self.
O of how many is this virtue desired? and of how few (yea, most few) observed. For, in effect it is nothing else but a mark, whereat all good men shoot with their Eyes, and all ill and wicked persons lose their sight.
The Emperor Augustus in the Triumph he made of Mark Anthony, AND his love Cleopatra, amongst others brought to Rome an Egyptian Priest, of 60. years of age, and the Senate being informed of a surety, that days of his life he never told lie, they agreed not only to restore him to liberty, but to make him high Priest of their Temple, and to erect a Statue of him, among the noble and princely persons of Rome.
Spartianus writes, that in the time of Clandian Emperor of Rome, there deceased a Citizen of Rome called  Pamphilus, whose doings after his death examined, it was manifestly proved, that he never spake one true Word all his life time, but always lied in that he said . 
Which related unto the Emperor, he commanded his body should not be buried, his goods should be confiscate, and his house razed to the foundation, and his wife and children for ever banished Rome, and all her Territories, to the end there should remain no memory to the Commonwealth, of so pestiferous and venomous a beast.
At that time when these 2 things thus happened, the Romans and Egyptians were mortal enemies, and therefore by these examples we may see, of what force and power this virtue of verity is, sith the Romans made a statue to their enemy, only for that he was a true and just man: and deprived of Sepulture their native child, and a Roman born, for that he was a liar.
A true man may go in any place where he lists, freely without interruption, accompanied with all men, not fearing to be accused of any, and may with safety reprove the vicious, and ill persons: And finally, to conclude, he may without the fear of any 
   
speak in the face of the world, AND show his face among the best. 
If a man will choose a friend, he need not be inquisitive if he be wise, just, chaste, careful, courageous, or noble, but only if he be true of his word. And if that be so, it follows that all virtues and honesty must abound in him.
Helius Spartianus recites of the life of Trajan the Emperor that being one night at Supper, and accompanied with noble men at his board: they argued of the fidelity of friends, and infidelity of enemies, whom Trajan answered. That he never had friend in his life but he was good, true, honest, and faithful; whereupon his Lords besought him, that it would please him to tell them the occasion of his good hap in this, And he answered thus:
The cause why I have ever been so fortunate herein was this, I never would choose to my friend a liar and  covetous man: For in him that reigns avarice, and lying, there can never dwell perfect friendship. 
Those that are honest, and like so to be reputed, must endeavor themselves to speak well always, and ever to say, that that is true: and if they will not do this for conscience sake, yet let them do it for to avoid the shame that follows them.
For there can be no greater mockery or despite done to a man, then openly to make him know he hath lied.
We see the child when he perceives he hath told a lie, he blushes straight, and is ashamed: much more ought men grown in years, whose face is covered with hairs, not only blush, but shame to tell a lie.
Many times I think what a great grief the Merchant suffers every hour not to be counted a Liar, when he utters his ware, and sure he doth it but because he would not lose his credit.
And lo here why they swear commonly by the faith of a Merchant to be more assured, when to the contrary we see many other, that in appearance seem to be honest and grave men, that use not the manner, but rather they will stick no mere to tell you a lie, then to lose a wheat grain:
But here I speak nor, neither do mean to touch those that are indeed virtuous and good men: but I speak of those that think themselves honest and yet be not, God knows. And therefore we may be assertained, that a merchant esteems more his goods and marchandize, then a liar doth his honour, otherwise honesty.
There is nothing that prejudices truth so much, as a tattling tongue that never lies: being in a manner impossible, that amongst many words, some lie he not interlaced. All things consist not in other more or less, save only in the use that men have of it: for if a man do use to eat little, he always goes from the Table: if we use to sleep little, we also leave our bed. And if we accustom our selves also to lie, we shall have it such a continual use, as though we would, we shall never leave it after: For there are diverse sorts of men, that as they accustom themselves to eat and drink oft times in a day, so do they use to lie every hour.
But I ask what is the greatest and most perfect thing in this life, that a man whilst he lives may enjoy. I dare boldly say, that it is neither nobility, great parentage, nor favour, neither the great estate, health, nor riches: but rather that it is the sole honour, which tattlers and liars may never enjoy, because they are never credited nor believed in their words: What fame, credit, honour, reputation, or good can he have, out of 
   
whose mouth there comes nothing but lies? 
A liar deserves credit of no man, neither that any man should deal with him in anything, much less to commit any matter of trust into his hands, no nor love him, nor accept of him, but rather as a detractor, and defamer of mens good name, we  should banish him our company. 
Hanibal that was the mighty Prince of the Carthagenians, so valiant in warlike prowess, so hardy to follow it, and therewithal so fortunate to over come his enemies, was yet notwithstanding, blamed of Titus Livius, and reputed for a malignant AND perjured person: For he never gave that he promised to his friends, neither ever kept any covenant or agreement made with his enemies. Such was not Gneus Pompeius (son to Pompey the great) with whom Octavian, and Mark Antony (both his mortal enemies) being at supper with him on the sea, Menodorus the Captain of his Army sent him word, if it were his pleasure, he would so lively have hoist up the sails of the ship, that he would soon have perished them, or sunked the ship they were in. To which message Pompey gave this answer.
Thou shalt tell Menodorus my Captain, that if I were Menodorus as he is, that never knew what truth meant, I would have followed his advise, and have done that he sends to me for: but if he were Pompeius as I am, which keeps my word and promises with all men, such a thought and treason would never have occupied his head.
Words sure worthy of so noble a Prince, son of so great and worthy a Father.
Herodotus writes also, that when the Egyptians would make any new amity betwixt themselves, or be in league, and confederate themselves with strangers, they used to bind their thumbs hard to the thumbs of those with whom they would join in friendship, and then with an instrument pricked everyone of their thumbs that the blood spurted out, which they sucked the one the other, with their tongue: inferring thereby, that they would rather shed their whole blood, then in one jot to falsify and break that friendship promised between them.
Is it not a goodly thing to hear him that swearth by the Mass, of mine honesty, so God catch me, by my good sooth, by cock and pie, and other like nice oaths, only under simplicity thereof to make you believe a lie he will tell you: which indeed we should least then believe, when he is most ruff in his oaths.
For it is most certain, the more a liar enforceth his words with abundance of Oaths, the less is he to be  believed. For that is a plain demonstration, that it is a prepensed Lie, he would make us believe for a truth. It is a sport to see a true man and a Liar in Argument together: for the true man enforceth his words none otherwise but thus: Truly friend, it is even thus as I tell thee, thou mayest if thou wilt believe me. 
And the other to defend and maintain his Lie, will invocate for witness all the devils of Hell, &c. So that for defense of the Trues, it suffices to stand fast on his feet: but for the defense of a lie he must run through the whole world.
If I were a King or prince to throw the beloved out of favour, to put my men out of service, to deprive men of their office AND dignity, or to disgrade a knight of his order of knight hood, or to give no more faith nor credit to one then another. I would desire no better occasion or testimony, then once to take him with a Lie. And I 
   
would think it less ill, that the fathers should rather pardon a great fault in their children, that friend in his friend, and the master in his servant, then to bear with him in one lie. For by Time the wings of sin is cut: But to lie is of such a condition, the elder a man waxeth, the more force and power it hath of him. 
It is not enough for a man to be free of this vice, but he must also fly and sequester himself from the fellowship of those which are possessed with that foul and inveterate Error, For, it is commonly seen, when a man would bring out a sudden Lie, to give it the more credit, he will avouch his friend for a witness, saying: he knows it, and was present with me.
Now those that hear this famous Lie, and know the very truth indeed of the matter as it was, condemns his friend he avouches (although he be innocent of the matter) for that he is brought in for testimony, as they do this notorious, and shameless Liar.
I should lie also for company, if I should deny to tell you, that being in the Court upon a time in a good presence, a friend of mine stuck not to forge a lie amongst others: and said  that he had sailed in a ship, made all of the canes of Cinnamon, and he avouched me for a witness: affirming that I was likewise with him in his company in the ship: and I to save his honour (he being my very friend) being ashamed he should incur the name of a Liar, was compelled seriously to confirm his tale with him, whereof I repented me afterwards with all my heart. For thereby I was in secret noted of the hearers, to be as great a liar as he.
Also another time, when I went to preach at the Court (being diseased of the gout) I walked up and down  with a staff of reed to stay me withal, the self same person I told you of before, told amongst the Prelates that were in the Chapel where I preached, that he had given me a Reed or cave to walk withal, that from one knob to another, it would hold three great pots of wine.
Lo, now by my example you may gather, what shame and dishonesty an honest virtuous man sustains, to be a friend and companion of one so shameless and horrible a Liar.
For to be plain, I was brought to this pass, by means of this friend of mine, that I could not tell what I should do, but when I heard him begin to speak, to fly from him, and leave him, because I would not be reputed of like reputation with him: how beit in the end I was forced to use this policy: that what he had openly avouched me a witness in, secretly again I would excuse myself and deny it.
But now returning to our matter again, I say, That these Courtiers AND Familiars of Princes, ought to exile and banish from them this abominable crime of lying: For if a mean gentleman or simple Plebeian happen sometimes to tell one thing for another, It is but taken of the Hearers straight for a simple lie.
But being spoken by one of the favoured of the Court, or other Gentleman of reputation, it is thought a kind of treason: For like as betwixt God and the sinner, our Saviour Jesus Christ, is our only mean and Mediator, being called upon by the Priest, even so betwixt the king and his Subjects, that are suitors to his  Majesty: those that are in favour with the prince, are mediators for them: Now therefore if these Priests be double in their words and dissemblers in that they speak, how shall the sins of the one be pardoned, AND the business of the other dispatched: 
   
O woful and unhappy sinner, that puts his sins into the hands of a naughty and wicked Priest, and likewise unfortunate and miserable is the poor suiter that commits his affairs to the trust AND dispatch of a lying and dissembling Officer. 
There are many officers in princes Courts, that tell the poor suitors still they will dispatch them, but when it comes to the push, to follow the matter, all his fair words are then but wind, and indeed they make an art of it, to speak all men fair, to promise much, and to perform nothing, weening with their sweet flattering words to win the hearts and good wills of all, little regarding the great expense and loss of time of the poor suitor: much less also respecting their own honour, honesties, and credit. Sure it were less dishonour for them, to be counted rough, and churlish, then to be bruited for liars, and breakers of their promise.
The officer of the Princes palace, that is a dissembler, and a Liar in his words, and doings, he may for a time maintain his suits, and go through with his matters: but in the end, his treacheries perceived, himself, his fautor, and all his dealings lie in the dust, and are utterly over thrown.
O how many have I seen rise in Court of nothing to great matters, and offices, and this not through their painful service, but altogether by means of their deceit and flatteries they used: not exalted also for their merits, but only by a subtle means and policy they had, to draw water to their Mill: nor for any good conscience they had, but only for their great diligence used in their practises. And all this not without the prejudice of others, but rather to the great hurt and utter undoing and ruin of their Neighbour: and not for any bounty they had to give liberally, but a greedy and covetous a desire to get: not for any needful business, but to have those that are superfluous: and not for to relieve the poor and needy, but only to satisfy their insatiable appetites: and in fine, their account cast, we have seen after their death their goods confiscated, their servants dispersed, and gone away, and their Children utterly undone.
So that in brief, there was no more memory of them in this world, and GOD grant also that in the other life their souls were not for ever damned.
Courtiers may easily with their favour and credit attain unto great possessions, as the Judges may also in robbing, the counselors in pleading, and maintaining naughty causes, the captains in polling the Prince of the Soldiers wages, the Merchants in their false weights and measures, and their Brokers, in telling lies out of all measure. But in the end of their journey AND pilgrimage, they may be assured that the souls of the Fathers shall not only be damned in hell, but the goods shall be taken from their Children. And also that that is truly and justly gotten by the honest industry and travel of the man, with a good zeal and holy intent, and to a good and just end: it is written that it shall be of long continuance, AND by the good permission of GOD, AND prayers of the people, it shall also prosper and increase.
For the true gotten goods, achieved by the sweat and labour of man, GOD doth always prosper and augment. And therefore continuing our matter, I say that the princes officers ought to determine with themselves, to be upright in all their actions and doings, and above all, true AND just of their words: which so performing, they shall be sure to be beloved of all, not alone of them that pass under their Lee, but even also of those whom they have denied favour. And 
   
also they need not to be afraid  to speak boldly in all places where they come, besides that they shall be reverenced of all men. Where to the contrary, if he be a liar, a babbler, AND dissembler, there are few that will fear them, much less love them, and least of all do them reverence, or honour. And although we cannot deny, but that these officers of the Court, and other men of authority be waited upon, visited, accompanied, reverenced, and honoured of diverse sorts of men: yet it were a folly for us to believe, that their train and attendants do them all that honour and reverence, for any desire they have to do them any service: but only they use all that courtesy and capping, to get themselves AND their suits quickly dispatched. And this to be true, we see it daily by experience. 
For, when these suitors have achieved their suit and desire, they do not only leave off, and give over  to accompany him, and to attend upon him: but moreover, they get them home, without either thanking of him, or once taking their leave of him.
If all those that have Function, or Office of estate or dignity, (having charge of the dispatch of great and weighty matters, being also liars and dissemblers in their doings) knew the ill reports that go of them, and how they condemn their corrupt and naughty consciences: me thinks it impossible (if they be not altogether graceless) but they must needs either change condition and estate, or else quit give up their rooms and offices. For they are in every mans mouth called Babblers, liars, dissemblers, traitors, perjurers, miserable, avaricious, and vicious. And yet a worser thing then all this, and that is: whilst they live, a thousand complain of them: and after they are dead and buried, they take up their bones out of the grave, to hang them up upon a gibbet. For thus says the old proverb: Such life, such end. So as we may say, that to these officers above recited, resteth nothing but only these goodly titles. And hereunto we may add also, that Officers of like conditions to them, need not to have any to accuse them, neither yet to punish them. For a time will come one day, that they will plunge themselves so deep into a Sea of troubles, that it cannot be chosen but they must needs at last drown , and utterly perish, or at the least be driven into the haven of their greatest Enemies: so that they shall carry the burden of their own wickedness, and be condignly chastised with their own folly.
Therefore I pray all those that shall read these writings of mine, for to observe them in their heart, and imprint them well in mind: being a matter of such Morality and wisdom, that it can hardly be understood of any, but of such as first have had some proof thereof.
Helius Sparthianus writes, that there was sometimes a Senator in Rome called Lucius Torquatus, who was a tyrant, a dissembler, a great liar, and very seditious, devising only to set discord between the Emperor Titus and the people: who being many times complained upon unto Titus he answered them thus: I pray you good people let no man seek to reprove him, persuade him, threaten, nor punish him: For he is so wicked and perverse in all things, that I trust in the Gods one day his own naughty and crooked condition, shall make revenge and satisfaction of all the mischiefs he hath done me: which was a wonderful thing in this noble prince, that for an injury of such great importance as that was, he would have no other revenge of him, but refer all to that he hoped to see by his own  ill nature. And sure the matter well considered, he had good reason to do it.
   
For a wicked person is of this condition, that after he hath once begun to do evil, he never ceases to do worse, (if he be not reclaimed by some honest man, until such time as unwares not looking to himself) he utterly falls to ruin and perdition. So that we may aptly compare an ill man, to a candle, which after it is once light, it never leaves burning, till it have made an end of it self. In great and weighty matters sometimes, such as have the dispatching of then, are wont to speak one word for another, AND also to make some faint promises to their suitors, not in respect to lie to them, nor deceive them: but to prolong them longer in suit, to increase their gain the more. Which I must say, they ought not to do, much less once to think it. When the Favoured Courtier or Officer of the prince is moved in any matter by the suitor, let him consider well if it be anything that may displease the Prince, be it never so little: For they must take great heed that they tell not Princes nor their Servants anything that they know may be displeasant to their ears: but only that that shall be both pleasant to the ear, profitable to the purse, and there withal, that it be true and necessary to be told and looked to. For there is no greater destruction to the Commonweal, then to bring false reports unto the K: of his affairs. 
It is one of the greatest kinds of treason that can be, for a Prince to disclose the secrets of his heart to his Favoured Courtier, and for him again to tell the Prince nothing but Lies and tales.
How great a friend soever the Prince be to his Favoured Courtier, yet the beloved courtier ought not to presume to advance himself to tell, or make his Prince believe one thing for another. For the matter afterwards discovered, and the truth known, it shall not be enough for him in his excuse, to tell the Prince that he made him believe so, only to satisfy his friend. For the King may justly tell him, that it is but an excuse, and that he meant no other but to deceive him. For princes ears and conditions are so delicate, that I am bold to admonish then that are his familiars, and beloved of him, that they endeavour themselves always to speak (with all humble duty and reverence) that that is true, yea though in secret it pleases the Prince to be merry with them.
This is ever true, he that is a friend of verity, is also of justice: and he that is a friend of justice, is also of the commonweal: and he that is a friend of the commonweal, is ever indued with a good conscience: and he that hath a good conscience, consequently is of a good life, he that is of a good life, is also of a good fame, and beloved of all. Albeit we cannot deny, but that his enemies will ever speak evil of him: yet we may say also, that they can never hurt nor condn him, but rather he should be counted a fool of all men, that will go about or seek to be his enemy, who is honest in his doings, true in his words, modest in his behavior, beloved, and well thought of of all. Therefore he puts himself into a great peril, that dare make himself a companion, and fellow in doings with a wise AND virtuous man: For he must think, that accompanying with such a man, he accompanies not his person alone, but also the virtues that reign in him: and if he do repugn and gainsay reasonable things, he shall straight show himself to come of a wicked race, and to be plunged and rooted in all malice.
Now to the end we may leave nothing behind, that may serve to advise and counsel this our favoured courtier. I say also, that there are many other in favour with the Prince, that oft times do procure the Prince to give 
   
offices of dignity, and realty of the Realm, sometimes to their kinsfolks, otherwhiles to their friends, and afterwards to their servants also, which perhaps are so unmeet and unworthy for them, that neither their merits shall deserve to have them, nor their knowledge and experience also fit, for so weighty an administration: And they do not procure these offices for them, for that they are wise and capable: but only to advance them above others, and because they are very troublesome and importunate. I am sorry to write it, and much more to see it, that offices are not given now for the benefit of the Commonwealth, but to recompense those of whom the favoured Courtier hath received pleasure, or else to satisfy the importunacy of his servants of his own house. 
But by process of time it might happen (by means of their skilless rule) that the king would take from them altogether their offices, or remove them from one place to another, although they were never well setled in a town, and commodiously: And being the Princes pleasure to do this, the wise and beloved Courtier must take heed, he do not contrary the king, much less take upon him to defend the ill government of those officers, hoping thereby to come to greatter honour: For it were less hurt for him, the officer lost his estate and office, then he his credit and reputation. Therefore those in favour and authority ought to content themselves with the Prince, the servants with their masters, and the parents and kinsfols with the Princes officers, for that they procured them these offices at the Kings hands, with the ill wills of many: without that they further press, and importune them, to suborn their faults: for after that the doings of these worthy officers be once discovered to be naught and corrupted, it is impossible by any means to make them good before the prince, with whom all the means the parents and kinsfolks of such persons can make, cannot stead them to bring them to their first honour by their own folly lost.
And now to end this our present volume of the favoured Courtier, I do assure all the beloved Courtiers, that if God shall find purity in their souls, the Commonweal justice in their own house, AND the king truth in their mouths, and fidelity in their hearts, the good and honest men grace in their favour, and that the ill and wicked boast themselves no more of their authority and office, and that the poor shall praise them for their good works and the King also find them faithful servants: I will at this present with mine own hand give them such faith and assurance, that they shall need never to fear that God will forsake them, nor that men can hurt them, AND that they shall never be detected of any infamy, over thrown  by any misfortune, neither put out of favour and credit with their prince at any time.